Simulation results processing
=============================

Results form Sailfish simulations can saved to disk for processing in external
applications or visualized in real-time.  These options are not exclusive, so
concurrent visualization and data saving is fully supported.

Data output
-----------

Sailfish supports a number of output data formats.  The data format is selected
using the ``--output_format`` command line option, which can take one of the
values listed in the "Parameter name" column below:

============= ============== =======================
Data format   Parameter name Required Python modules
============= ============== =======================
HDF5 (flat)   h5flat         pytables
HDF5 (nested) h5nested       pytables
VTK           vtk            tvtk
numpy archive npy            numpy
MatLab array  mat            scipy
============= ============== =======================

In all modes, the name of the output file is specified using the ``--output`` command
line option, though the exact meaning of this is different for different file formats.

In the ``h5nested`` mode, a single HDF5 file is created.  The file contains a single
group called ``results``.  The group contains a single table and each record in this
table corresponds to the state of the simulation at a specific iteration.  The table
contains columns for velocity components (``vx``, ``vy`` and ``vz``), density (``rho``),
the current iteration (``iter``), and possibly also other scalar and vector fields
used in the simulation.

In the ``h5flat`` mode, also a single HDF5 file is created.  The file contains
multiple groups, called ``iterXXX`` where ``XXX`` is the iteration number.  Each
of the groups contains a number of arrays with the scalar and vector field data.

In the ``vtk``, ``npy`` and ``mat`` modes, multiple files are generated, each containing the state
of the simulation at a specific iteration.  The file names are generated by appending
the iteration number to the base name provided via the ``--output`` option, e.g. if
``--output=poiseuille`` is used, ``poiseuille00400.xml`` will contain data for the
400th iteration.

Data visualization
------------------

Sailfish supports on-line data visualization regardless of whether any results are
written out to files on disk.  If you don't want any visualization, start your simulations
with the ``--batch`` option.  The visualization modules for 2D and 3D are
different, and thus will be discussed separately.

Visualization of 2D data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

2D simulations can be monitored using an interactive pygame-based interface.
The interface supports a number of color maps, which can be changed interactively (see below).

The initial size of the visualization window can be controlled with command line parameters.
One can specify its size explicitly using the ``--scr_w`` and ``--scr_h`` options
to set the width and height, respectively.  Alternatively, the ``--scr_scale`` option can
be used to make the window dimensions directly proportional to those of the lattice, e.g.
if ``--scr_scale=3`` is used the window will be 3 times larger than the lattice and each
lattice site will be visualized as a 3x3 square.

Interaction with the simulation is provided via mouse: left key presses place walls
(i.e. nodes with the no-slip boundary condition, with no intrinsic velocity) in the
simulation domain, and right key presses remove them.  Moving the mouse with the :kbd:`Ctrl`
key pressed, will impart velocity to the fluid under the mouse cursor.  The ``--imparted_velocity``
and ``--imparted_diameter`` options can be used to control this process.

The visualization module can be controlled from the keyboard, and the following
keys are defined:

=====  ============================================================================================
``-``  previous scalar field
``=``  next scalar field
``[``  previous color map
``]``  next color map
``i``  toggle visibility of text info about the state of the simulation (MLUPS, iteration etc.)
``v``  toggle visualization of the velocity vector field
``t``  toggle visualization of the fluid tracer particles
``c``  toggle convolution of the visualization with a Gaussian kernel (this has a smoothing effect)
``e``  apply the emboss filter to the visualization (useful to monitor sound waves)
``r``  reset the simulation geometry (this clears any obstacles added interactively)
``q``  quit the simulation
``s``  take a screenshot
``,``  decrease the max value used in the color map
``.``  increase the max value used in the color map
=====  ============================================================================================


Visualization of 3D data
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

3D data visualization is provided via the mayavi package.  This visualization is
not interactive at this time.

3D data can also be visualized in *cutplane* mode, using the pygame-based interface.
To select this mode, use the ``--vis=cutplane`` command line option.  Only cutplanes
perpendicular to a domain axis are currently supported.  The ``x``, ``y`` and ``z`` keys
can be used to select the cutplane.  The ``;`` and ``'`` keys can be used to move
the cutplane along the selected axis.  Tracer particles are not supported in the cutplane mode.
